user-specified chunk layouts (#1528)
NanoComp/meep: doc/docs/Parallel_Meep.md

As a demonstration, an example of a 2d cell partition along with its binary-tree representation is shown below. The 10×5 cell in $xy$ coordinates with origin at the lower-left boundary is partitioned into five chunks numbered one through five.

<center>
![](images/chunk_division_binary_tree.png)
</center>

This binary tree can be described as a list of lists where each list entry is `[ (split_dir,split_pos), left, right ]` for which `split_dir` and `split_pos` define the splitting direction and position, and `left` and `right` are the left and right branches which can be either another list defining a new node or a process ID. Based on these specifications, the cell partition from above can be set up as follows:

```py
import meep as mp
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

chunk_layout = mp.BinaryPartition(data=[ (mp.X,-2.0), 0, [ (mp.Y,1.5),
                                         [ (mp.X,3.0), 1, [ (mp.Y,-0.5), 4, 3 ] ], 2 ] ])

cell_size = mp.Vector3(10.0,5.0,0)

sim = mp.Simulation(cell_size=cell_size,
                    resolution=10,
                    chunk_layout=chunk_layout)

sim.visualize_chunks()
plt.savefig('chunk_layout.png',dpi=150,bbox_inches='tight')
```

> For improved performance, consider ordering the chunks such that adjacent chunks are numbered consecutively. This is equivalent to assigning MPI ranks in [depth-first order](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Depth-first_search) which ensures that adjacent chunks on the same MPI node communicate using shared memory rather than the network (which tends to be slower).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For improved performance, we recommend ordering the process IDs in [depth-first order](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Depth-first_search) of the tree, which will tend to give spatially adjacent chunks nearby process IDs.  This increases the chance that adjacent chunks are on the same MPI node, improving communication speeds.
```

Note: for optimization studies involving *random* initial conditions, the seed of the random number generator must be specified otherwise each process will have a different initial condition which will cause a crash. For example, if you are initializing the design variables with `numpy.random.rand`, then you should call `numpy.random.seed(...)` to set the same `numpy.random` seed on every process.

### User-Specified Cell Partition

> An alternative to having Meep automatically partition the cell at runtime into chunks based on the number of MPI processes is to manually specify the cell partition via the `chunk_layout` parameter of the `Simulation` constructor as a [`BinaryPartition`](Python_User_Interface.md#binarypartition) class object. This is based on representing an arbitrary cell partition as a binary tree for which the nodes define "cuts" at a given point (e.g., -4.5, 6.3) along a given cell direction and the leaves define a unique integer-valued chunk ID (equivalent to the rank of the MPI process for that chunk).

Reviewer: Key point: this is not a "chunk ID", it is a "process ID" which *must* be between 0 and #processes–1 (inclusive).  Note also that the same process ID can be assigned to as many chunks as you want, which just means that process timesteps multiple chunks.

As a demonstration, an example of a 2d cell partition along with its binary-tree representation is shown below. The 10×5 cell in $xy$ coordinates with origin at the lower-left boundary is partitioned into five chunks numbered one through five. Note that for any given cell partition, its binary-tree representation is unique.

<center>
![](images/chunk_division_binary_tree.png)
</center>

> This binary tree can be described as a list of lists where each list entry is `[ (split_dir,split_pos), left, right ]` for which `split_dir` and `split_pos` define the splitting direction and position, and `left` and `right` are the left and right branches which can be either another list defining a new node or a chunk ID. There are two items to note when converting the binary tree shown above into a `BinaryPartition` class object: (1) by default, Meep defines the cell origin to be at the geometric center of the cell (i.e., at location (5.0,2.5) in the coordinate system of the figure) and thus all splitting coordinates must be shifted accordingly, and (2) MPI ranks must be defined in the range [0,`num_chunks`-1] which requires that all chunk IDs be shifted down by one. Based on these specifications, the cell partition from above can be set up as follows:

Reviewer: I think the figure should should the correct (Meep) coordinate system, rather than showing the wrong coordinate system and warning the reader in the text.

```py
import meep as mp
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

chunk_layout = mp.BinaryPartition(data=[ (mp.X,-2.0), 0, [ (mp.Y,1.5),
                                         [ (mp.X,3.0), 1, [ (mp.Y,-0.5), 4, 3 ] ], 2 ] ])

cell_size = mp.Vector3(10.0,5.0,0)

sim = mp.Simulation(cell_size=cell_size,
                    resolution=10,
                    num_chunks=5,

>                     chunk_layout=chunk_layout)

Reviewer: Can't it get `num_chunks` from the `chunk_layout`?

Reviewer: In particular:
```
def numchunks(bp=None):
    if bp is None:
        return 0
    return min(numchunks(bp.left) + numchunks(bp.right), 1)
```

sim.visualize_chunks()
plt.savefig('chunk_layout.png',dpi=150,bbox_inches='tight')
```

> This example can be run using two different approaches: (1) with the number of MPI processes exactly equivalent to the number of user-specified chunks (i.e., `mpirun -np 5 python chunk_layout_example.py`) or (2) using *any* number of MPI processes and letting Meep automatically distribute the MPI ranks among the five chunks by additionally specifying `num_chunks=5` in the `Simulation` constructor.

Reviewer: This is wrong: You have to use ≥ 6 processes, but then only 6 of them will be used and the rest will be idle.

> For improved performance, it is important to order the chunks such that adjacent chunks are numbered consecutively. This is equivalent to assigning MPI ranks in [depth-first order](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Depth-first_search) which ensures that adjacent chunks on the same MPI node communicate using shared memory rather than the network (which tends to be slower).

Reviewer: it is important to order -> consider ordering

Reviewer: ensures that ... -> tends to place adjacent chunks in the same MPI node (improving communication speed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For improved performance, we recommend ordering the process IDs in [depth-first order](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Depth-first_search) of the tree, which will tend to give spatially adjacent chunks nearby process IDs.  This increases the chance that adjacent chunks are on the same MPI node, improving communication speeds.
```

> This example can be run by specifying the number of MPI processes exactly equivalent to the number of user-specified chunks (i.e., `mpirun -np 5 python chunk_layout_example.py`) or (2) using *any* number of MPI processes and letting Meep automatically distribute the MPI ranks among the five chunks by additionally specifying `num_chunks=5` in the `Simulation` constructor.

Reviewer: No need for `num_chunks`, but it won't actually use more than 5 processes.
